@def title = "GSoC in LLVM 2024"
@def author = "Miguel Raz Guzmán Macedo"
@def tags = ["LLVM", "Julia", "LLVM"]
@def rss = "GSoC in LLVM 2024"
@def rss_pubdate = Date(2024, 02, 29)
@def published = "02 29 2024"
@def rss_guid = 9

# I'm trying to get a GSoC 2024 in LLVM

and I will be documenting my work with this ongoing blogpost in reverse chronological order.

---

If you want to see more posts like this, consider chucking a buck or two on my [GitHub sponsors](https://github.com/miguelraz), or, you know, hire me as a grad student.

---


## 19/02/2024

Got feedback for the proposal. Seems people like not reading ChatGPT scripts, whodathunkit. Aggregated suggestions and sent it off.
Should update if I get more updates.

Also, rebased the next step of the PR, which is merging into the [SelectionDAG](https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/pull/85822)

## 18/02/2024 

IT GOT MERGED!

I wrote up the draft proposal, and sent it for feedback from the mentors.

Tomorrow I'll try to get started on the next steps of the proposal and send a dummy PR to get to the good stuff.

## 17/02/2024 

Actually just rested yesterday. 'Twas good. Today I'll do some  light reading.

* `isa<>, cast<>, dyn_cast<>` templates
    * `isa<>` returns `true/false` if it's an instance of the specified class 
    *  `cast<>` is a "checked cast"
    * `dyn_cast<>` usually used in `if (auto *AI = dyn_cast<AllocationInst>(Val)) {`
* `STringRef` and `Twine` - `Value` class and `StringMap` must be generic over null chars, can't take a `const char*`
* Error handling: abort early, use `assert(cond && "you done goofed");`
```
enum { Foo, Bar, Baz } X = foo();

switch (X) {
  case Foo: /* Handle Foo */; break;
  case Bar: /* Handle Bar */; break;
  default:
    llvm_unreachable("X should be Foo or Bar here");
}
```

* use LLVM_DEBUG and [friends](https://llvm.org/docs/ProgrammersManual.html#fine-grained-debug-info-with-debug-type-and-the-debug-only-option)
```
LLVM_DEBUG(dbgs() << "I am here!\n");
```
and then 
```
$ opt < a.bc > /dev/null -mypass
<no output>
$ opt < a.bc > /dev/null -mypass -debug
I am here!
```

* Use the [Statistic](https://llvm.org/docs/ProgrammersManual.html#the-statistic-class-stats-option) class!

* stopped at picking the right data structure.

## 16/02/2024 

Start: read LLVM Programmer's Manual, then start with some local changes to the SelectionDAG.

## 15/02/2024

Derp, I kept getting "undefined intrinsics" errors when running FileCheck like 

```
> ../../../build/bin/opt -S -passes=verify 2>&1 intrinsic-cmp.ll | FileCheck intrinsic-cmp.ll
```
... because I had to rebuild LLVM and have the new `opt` pick it up. Once that happened, even the new `llvm-lit` passed :D

I also had to remove the `CHECK-LABEL`, still not sure why. Lemme read that for a bit.

Also, I should update `mold` - it failed with an unknown `--long-plt` option.

Here's my LLVM build instruction: 

```
> cmake -S . -B build -G Ninja -DLLVM_TARGETS_TO_BUILD=X86 -DBUILD_SHARED_LIBS=ON -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Debug -DLLVM_OPTIMIZED_TABLEGEN=ON -DLLVM_USE_NEWPM=ON -DLLVM_USE_SPLIT_DWARF=ON -DLLVM_PARALLEL_LINKER_JOBS=10 -DLLVM_PARALLEL_COMPILE_JOBS=10
> mold -run ninja -C .
```

Windows builders take freakin' forever to run.

* Coding Standards 
    * prefer `llvm::DenseMap` over `std::unordered_map` and similar. No std IO plz.
    * comments - write what does is trying to do and why, not *how*
    * spaces not tabs
    * prefer C++ style casts like `auto DestVecLen = cast<VectorType>(DestTy)->getElementCount();` for getting the Vector length
    * beware `auto` copies:
```
// Typically there's no reason to copy.
for (const auto &Val : Container) observe(Val);
for (auto &Val : Container) Val.change();

// Remove the reference if you really want a new copy.
for (auto Val : Container) { Val.change(); saveSomewhere(Val); }

// Copy pointers, but make it clear that they're pointers.
for (const auto *Ptr : Container) observe(*Ptr);
for (auto *Ptr : Container) Ptr->change();
```
    * use early returns, specially in loops:
```
// not this 
for (Instruction &I : BB) {
  if (auto *BO = dyn_cast<BinaryOperator>(&I)) {
    Value *LHS = BO->getOperand(0);
    Value *RHS = BO->getOperand(1);
    if (LHS != RHS) {
      ...
    }
  }
}
// prefer this 
for (Instruction &I : BB) {
  auto *BO = dyn_cast<BinaryOperator>(&I);
  if (!BO) continue;

  Value *LHS = BO->getOperand(0);
  Value *RHS = BO->getOperand(1);
  if (LHS == RHS) continue;

  ...
}
```
    * other good tips for no *else* after a *return* 
    * turn predicate loops into functions 
    * assert liberally! you may find other people's bugs! `assert(Ty->isPointerType() && "Can't allocate a non-pointer type!");`
    * consider `llvm::unreachable("invalid radix for integer literal")`
    * never `using namespace std`
    * don't evaluate `end()` every time through a loop!
```
// not this
BasicBlock *BB = ...
for (auto I = BB->begin(); I != BB->end(); ++I)
  ... use I ...

// prefer this 
BasicBlock *BB = ...
for (auto I = BB->begin(), E = BB->end(); I != E; ++I)
  ... use I ...
```
    * lol `#include <iostream>` is forbidden, as well as `std::endl`
    * prefer preincrement (++x)
    * anonymous namespaces allow more aggressive optimizations! make them small and only use them for class declarations
    * omit braces on short if's -_-
    * read "Effective C++" by Scott Meyers or "Large Scale C++ Software Design" by John Lakos. later.

BIG ALERT! We're passing all tests and Nikita says "LGTM!" Huzzahhh!

I finished reading the Coding Standards and will now read the LLVM Programmer's Manual.

Afternoon: only 1 reviewer missing approval!


## 14/02/2024 

It's close to finishingggggggggg

Nikita mentioned the [CodingStandars](https://llvm.org/docs/CodingStandards.html#name-types-functions-variables-and-enumerators-properly), I'll give that a read in a bit.

In `FileCheck` unit tests, it's just 2 spaces, not tabs or 4 spaces.

Dhruv recommends using `git clang-format` or `Format Modified Lines` in VSCode.

I only have to make `FileCheck` pass now and Nikita says it should be good!


## 13/02/2024 

OK, I just saw that both Nikita Popov and Dhruv Chawla are listed as mentors for the project.
Should try and reach out before the application period begins.

Nikita commented that there's two good places to look into (which I should do meanwhile):

* The [Selection DAG part of the manual](https://llvm.org/docs/CodeGenerator.html#instruction-selection-section)
* The good first issues on the github tracker, which probably are good to look into.

### Notes on the SelectionDAG 
* GlobalISel and SelectionDAG both translated LLVM code to target specific machine instructions.
* In theory Intrinsics.td should handle it all but some parts need custo C++ code.
* SDAGs represent Machine Value Types and DataFlow types. Dataflow types provide ordering.
* Legal vs illegal DAG: only use supported ops on supported types 
* SDAG phases: build, optimize, legalizeTypes, optimize, legalize, select instructions, scheduling
        * common to use `-debug-only=isel/-dump` and `-filter-print-funcs=<function-name>`
    * several flags can print SDAG after each pass 
* OK, effective sign extension elimination seems to be highly non-trivial optimizations
* Oohhhh TableGen representing stuff as a DAG lets you build the SelectionDAG on top of it!

After a few hours of noodling with PR reviews, it's clear I gotta jump on a next one/help PR review some other people.
Maybe it's not great to go full mercenary on every `good-first-issue` and try and help others along the way.

`ParticleSwarmOptimization` was kind enough in the `LLVM/beginners` Discord chat to point out that
I should have a full build of LLVM and then run `llvm-lit` from there on a unit test. Sure enough,
that let me do `gh pr checkout 84903` and then `LIT llvm/test/CodeGen/AArch64/hadd-combine.ll` to check that a unit test properly ran.
Now I can help verify my own and other people's PRs! yay!

That seems like enough for today, I'll hunt for some good issues tomorrow.

## 12/02/2024 

Did a bunch of very quick fixes and got some neat feedback.

## 11/02/2024 

Ohhhhhh neat! Got some really fast feedback this time around on stray newlines and a couple fixes on the PR. 
Things are moving faster and faster! I *think* I'm only missing adding some `FileCheck` tests for the 
invariants under the `Verifier.cpp` stuff that isn't handled by `Intrinsics.td` but that sounds about it!

[FileCheck](https://llvm.org/docs/CommandGuide/FileCheck.html) reading I'll do for a bit.

Note: If you are going to check multiple things in a single file, use a `CHECK-LABEL` to avoid spurious matches.

Sometimes, a `CHECK-NEXT` is useful as the last unit test. 

Learned the LLVMIR verbose call syntax goes (gotta include types in call site).

That should do it for today, see y'all tomorrow.

## 10/02/2024 

Plan for today: Read the IR Verifier, add code to it if needed, then work on adding to SDAG node.

IR Verifier code: It's under `llvm/IR/Verifier.h` and `llvm/IR/Verifier.cpp`.

Ok, read the code for a bit. What I'm interested in in `Verifier.cpp` is the huge switch statement towards the end of the file where the verification of intrinsics happens.

Oh neat, learned a lot of places that probably need modification via searching `case Intrinsic::` in the llvm folder.

Neat! `VectorUtils.cpp` looks like where we add SIMD :D

There is also a `SelectionDAGBuilder.cpp` that seems like I should update stuff there.

Ah, seems the SDAG needs the ID node to be added to the ISDOpcodes first, like `ISD::SCMP` and such.

[Intrinsic Function](https://llvm.org/docs/LangRef.html#intrinsic-functions): start with `llvm.` prefix.
Must always be external functions. If any are added, must be documented in LangRef. Have naming convention on type name return.

In `TargetLowering.h`:
```
/// This class defines information used to lower LLVM code to legal SelectionDAG
/// operators that the target instruction selector can accept natively.
///
/// This class also defines callbacks that targets must implement to lower
/// target-specific constructs to SelectionDAG operators.
class TargetLowering : public TargetLoweringBase {
```

Updated the PR to not include a dirty file from the `ValueTracking.cpp` unit tests.

Sweet, rebased the `spaceship-intrinsic` branch changes into a new one.

Now I can go for 

```
lib/CodeGen/SelectionDAG/SelectionDAG.cpp:

Add code to print the node to getOperationName. If your new node can be
evaluated at compile time when given constant arguments (such as an add of a constant with another constant), find the getNode method that takes the appropriate number of arguments, and add a case for your node to the switch statement that performs constant folding for nodes that take the same number of arguments as your new node.
```

Which gives on Line 6629 of `SelectionDAG.cpp`

```
SDValue SelectionDAG::getNode(unsigned Opcode, const SDLoc &DL, EVT VT,
                              SDValue N1, SDValue N2, const SDNodeFlags Flags) {
```

where I can add an `case ISD::UCMP`/`case ISD::SCMP`. 

Oh wow, having VSCode let me just hover over a type and give me info is amazing.

Alright, did some good work today I think.

-----

Got some feedback on typo fixes from other people and some concrete directions from Nikita:

```
def int_scmp : DefaultAttrsIntrinsic<
    [llvm_anyint_ty], [llvm_anyint_ty, LLVMMatchType<1>],
    [IntrNoMem, IntrSpeculatable, IntrWillReturn]>;

```
for the `Intrinsics.td` so that we can have a "result type overload over a fixed type" and then 

> and then add a check in Verifier.cpp that a) the return type and the first argument type have the same number of elements (if they are vectors) and b) the return scalar type has width at least 2.

So I've pushed a commit already to have the `Intrinsics.td` that way and I will now add a case to the `Verifier.cpp` in the 
`void Verifier::visitIntrinsicCall(Intrinsic::ID ID, CallBase &Call) {` to add 

(Many hours later) Put in a good first effort into the `Verifier.cpp` cases for `Intrinsic::scmp/ucmp`.
It's probably a bit boneheaded but I've been getting really good and fast feedback on the PRs, so I feel
encouraged to keep the hot streak going.

## 09/02/2024

Lost the renaming battle to standard practices. Can't complain. Updated the PR to reflect that.

Now, reading the [DCE](https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/blob/release/17.x/llvm/lib/Transforms/Scalar/DCE.cpp) pass code.

Ok, Andrzej Warzyński did [an incredibly useful tutorial](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ar7cJl2aBuU) for `llvm-tutor`.

I'll try writing the Transformation pass, since it's closes to what I need.

Notes:
    * `LLVM_DEBUG` is super useful. 
    ```
#include "llvm/ADT/Statistic.h"
#include "llvm/Support/Debug.h"

#define DEBUG_TYPE "mba-add"
STATISIC(SubstCount, "The # of substituted instructions"
    ```
    and then you can do:
    ```
    LLVM_DEBUG(dbgs() << *BinOp << " -> " << *NewInst << "\n";
    // or , with Statistic and `-stat` on the `opt` CLI and debug build
    ++SubstCount;
    ```

* Analysis inherits from `AnalysisInfoMixin`

* Very common pattern:
```
for (auto &Func : M) {
    for (auto &BB : Func) {
        for (auto &Ins : BB) {
            ...
```

* You call `PreservedAnalysis.abandon()` when you wanna bail on a logic.

* `FileCheck` is a pattern matching tool that comes with LLVM. Can check emitted assembly output for test correctness.

* Rely on CMake's `find_package` and add sanity-checks to your scripts!

* LLDB is your friend 
```
lldb -- $LLVM_DIR/bin/opt -load-pass-plugin lib/libMyPass.so -passes=my-pass -S dummy.ll
(lldb) b MyPass::run 
(lldb) r
```

Finally: started a branch called `scmp-and-ucmp` and I'll start trying out changes there whilst people make up their minds.



## 8/02/2024 

Jyn strikes again and sometimes you can just do `make` after `cmake` because some stuff is optional.

Otherwise, install:

```
sudo apt install libzstd-dev libcurl4-openssl-dev libedit-dev
```
to get rolling.

Once you do 
```
# Run the pass
$LLVM_DIR/bin/opt -load-pass-plugin ./libHelloWorld.{so|dylib} -passes=hello-world -disable-output input_for_hello.ll
# Expected output
(llvm-tutor) Hello from: foo
(llvm-tutor)   number of arguments: 1
(llvm-tutor) Hello from: bar
(llvm-tutor)   number of arguments: 2
(llvm-tutor) Hello from: fez
(llvm-tutor)   number of arguments: 3
(llvm-tutor) Hello from: main
(llvm-tutor)   number of arguments: 2
```
using `-disable-output` means no bitcode gets produced.

Passes come in 3 flavors, mostly: Analysis, Transformations and CFG manipulations.

Note that `clang` adds the `optnone` function attribute if 1) no opt level is specified or 
`-O0` is specified. 

Ah, forgot to run the `cmake .. -> mold -run make -j` and had some passes missing. Derp.

Minutes lost to cmake bullshit: 60.

Oh sweet! I just learned that I can write an injection pass that will give me a new binary and it will print out cool analysis info.

Also, if I get an instrumented binary I can just use `lli` to interpret the `.ll` file directly.

You can also build a static binary that will run that analysis for you! 

Ran a bunch of passes with `opt` and friends. Transformation passes will normally inherit from `PassInfoMixin`.

Analysis Passes will inherit from `AnalysisInfoMixin`.

Ok, cool I an outdated example in llvm-tutor [in the examples](https://github.com/banach-space/llvm-tutor/pull/111) and sent a PR for it.

Tomorrow I shall dive into those optimization passes at the end and hopefully run some good `lit` tests.


## 7/02/2024 

Alright, did some good catchup on the semester and pushed the [PR forward a bit](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-add-3-way-comparison-intrinsics/76685/7?u=miguelraz).

I also had an awesome "uniwtting tourist" genius moment by pointing out the return type could be different than what Nikita had thought of.

Today I setup my environment with

```
wget -O - https://apt.llvm.org/llvm-snapshot.gpg.key | sudo apt-key add -
sudo apt-add-repository "deb http://apt.llvm.org/jammy/ llvm-toolchain-jammy-17 main"
sudo apt-get update
sudo apt-get install -y llvm-17 llvm-17-dev llvm-17-tools clang-17
```

so now I can run `opt` shenanigans without awkward path invocations.

## 2/02/2024 

I'm waiting for others to chime in on my latest fix so I will be reading on how to add [unit tests](https://llvm.org/docs/TestingGuide.html).

Cool, that took like 25 minutes and I pushed a commit into the unit test generation framework.

Took me a bit but tried adding using `llvm-lit` and couldn't get the `Examples` folder to run,
so I posted a question in the #beginners channel about it.

## 1/02/2024 

Sweet! I was able to address Nikita's refactoring comments without too much hassle.

I guess the next task is to add it to the Verifier.

-> I read the `llvm/lib/IR/Verifier.cpp` header and grep'd for `smin`. Seems I can add a 

```
Intrinsics::vector_reduce_sthreecmp:
Intrinsics::vector_reduce_uthreecmp:
```

on line 5378 and get away with this. I don't see other places where it's defined.

I think I've hit my potential here. I will go do some tutorials.


## 29/02/2024 

### "hazlo cobarde"

Add the [3 way comparison instruction](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/llvm-add-3-way-comparison-intrinsics/76807/10) `<=>` to LLVM. 

I like this GSoC in particular because

* I will learn a wide swath of LLVM 
* I'll be working with a lot of optimization passes
* I'll get to bring cool perf to C++/Rust and Julia
* I was dared by [the other, more talented Miguel](https://twitter.com/DrawsMiguel/status/1759708211286835309) to actually help improve LLVM

### Task 1: Add to LangRef

[Add a new intrinsic](https://llvm.org/docs/ExtendingLLVM.html) - `Langref`, then `Intrinsics.td`, then maybe the pass verifier.

I've already put up a [sample PR](https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/pull/83227) and got redirected on what looks like the proper working path for this endeavour.

Oh neat, I've finished. Only took about 1 hour with careful copy pasting. I'm probably blundering the return type being `iM` bits, but someone will correct me.

Now, I need to add an entry of the intrinsic into TableGen.

### Task 2: Add to Intrinsics.td

Whelp, I guess I gotta learn tablegen and then this `Intrinsics.td` file.

Ok, I found [a non-intimidating TableGen overview](https://llvm.org/docs/TableGen/index.html).

Gotta find the optimization wizardry in there after reading for a few minutes.

Alright, took more than a bit of an hour but [I got pushed something for this task](https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/pull/83227#issuecomment-1972375003).

Pinged Nikita to get some adults to look at my horrible TableGen incantation.

See ya tomorrow.


